---
short_title: Running output scripts
title: Running output scripts - Text Shortcut Script Generation - Modules
---

<h1 align="center">Running output scripts</h1>
<h2 align="center"><a href="./index.html">Text Shortcut Script Generation module</a></h2>


---
## Requirements

The requirements to be able to use a text shortcut script generated by Petrichor are listed below.


---
### AutoHotkey

The scripts that this module generates are AutoHotkey v2 scripts.

In order to run them, you will need to install [AutoHotkey v2](https://www.autohotkey.com).


---
## Running text shortcut scripts

With [AutoHotkey](#autohotkey) installed, simply double-click the script ( `.ahk` file ).

You can also right-click on it and click `run` in the context menu.

---
## Automatically run scripts after generating them

You can make a [batch script](../../getting-started/command-usage.md/#running-petrichor-via-batch-file) wait for Petrichor to finish running and launch the output script automatically.

1. Create a batch script using the steps linked above.
2. After the `start` keyword, add `/wait`. This will cause the batch script to wait until Petrichor is closed before continuing.
3. Add a new line to the batch script, and enter `start {path/script.ahk}`.
4. Save the batch file.

Once you've done these steps, you can run the `.bat` file by double clicking it.

If the `.bat` file was made correctly, it will run Petrichor, wait until it closes, then launch the output script.

!!! note

    If Petrichor fails to generate a new output script, the Batch script will launch any existing version of the output script instead.

???+ example

    ``` title="Folder contents"
    - parent\
        - Petrichor\
            - Petrichor.exe
        - example batch file.bat
        - inputFile.txt
    ```
    === "Command in command line arguments"

        ```batch title="example batch file.bat"
        start /wait {install path}\Petrichor.exe commandName --inputFile ..\inputFile.txt
        start outputFile.ahk
        ```

    === "Command in input file"

        ```batch title="example batch file.bat"
        start /wait {install path}\Petrichor.exe ..\inputFile.txt
        start outputFile.ahk
        ```

---
## Launching scripts automatically on startup

There are a few options to launch scripts automatically when Windows logs in.

---
### Windows Startup shortcut

!!! important "Recommended"

    This is the simplest and most reliable method.

1. Right-click the script in File Explorer.
2. Click `Create shortcut` in the dropdown menu.
3. Press `Win+R` to open the Windows Run dialog.
    - You can also open the Start Menu and search for `Run`.
4. Type `shell:startup` into the dialog, then click OK.
5. The `Startup` folder will open. Copy the shortcut you created in step 2 into it.

---
### Task Scheduler

!!! important "Not recommended"

    This method is unreliable, tedious and awkward to set up, and easy to break.

The Windows Startup method is easier and more reliable.

Using this method is only recommended if the Windows Startup method does not work.

Follow the directions [here](https://windowsloop.com/run-autohotkey-script-at-windows-startup/) to set it up.

---
### Registry (CAUTION)

!!! important "Strongly not recommended"

    It is **strongly** reecommended to use one of the other methods above.

    **Only use this method if no other method works and you are willing to risk breaking your computer.**

!!! danger

    <h1> DO NOT DO THIS UNLESS YOU KNOW EXACTLY WHAT YOU'RE DOING.</h1>

    **Editing the registry can potentially brick your computer.**

    **Follow these steps at your own risk.**

    **If you fuck around and find out, it is your own damn fault.**

??? danger "Instructions"

    1. Open the Registry Editor. There are two days to do this:
        - Press `Win+R` to open the Run dialog, type in `regedit`, then click OK.
        - Open the Start menu and search for either `regedit` or `Registry Editor`.
    2. **BACK UP YOUR REGISTRY BEFORE MAKING ANY EDITS. DO THIS EVERY TIME.**
        1. Click the `File` button in the toolbar.
        2. Click `Export` in the dropdown menu.
        3. Enter a file name and save the file. **Use an obvious file name and save the file somewhere you will find it again later.**
    3. Navigate to `HKEY_CURRENT_USER\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run`.
    4. Add a new String key. Name it however you prefer. **Make sure the name will make sense to you later.**
    5. Edit the value of the new string key and put in `"@:\path\to\autohotkey\version\file.exe" "@:\path\to\script\file.ahk"`, using the file paths of your AutoHotkey installation and your script file.

    **If in doubt, restore the registry backup you made in step 2.**
